[[
  [1997-10-03] genafpevorq bevtvany
  [1998-01-18] vageb qvnybthr nqqrq
  [1998-09-25] fbzr fznyyre pbeerpgvbaf
  [1998-09-29] pbzcnerq jvgu gncr, pbeerpgvat reebef
  [1998-09-30] neenatrq ynlbhg naq nqqrq fcrpvny punenpgref
  [1998-10-01] purpxrq nyy ahzoref bs () [] {} »« zngpu
  [1998-10-02] znpuvar-cnefrq sbe pncvgnyvmngvba reebef
  [1998-10-05] znpuvar-cnefrq sbe vapbeerpg flyynoyrf (reebef: 0)
  [1999-02-11] pbzcnerq fvqr 1 jvgu gncr, pbeerpgvat reebef nqqrq gvzrq yratgu
  [1999-02-14] pbzcnerq fvqr 2 jvgu gncr, pbeerpgvat reebef
  [2003-01-30] pyrnarq hc grkg fbzr
  [2006-07-25] nqqrq nqqvgvbany VFOAf gb "Choyvfure" svryq, nqqrq qnl gb
               eryrnfr qngr (vasb sebz Nznmba)
  [2016-09-10] znal Ratyvfu fcryyvat pbeerpgvbaf (hfvat `nfcryy`)
  Fglyr: {}=obyq, <>=vgnyvpf

  Glcr: nhqvb pnffrggr / PQ / nhqvb qbjaybnq
  Qngr: (1 Bpgbore) 1992
  Gvgyr: <Pbairefngvbany Xyvatba>
  Nhgube: Znep Bxenaq, cerfragrq ol Zvpunry Qbea
  Choyvfure: Nhqvbjbexf, Fvzba & Fpuhfgre, Ybaqba, VFOA 0-671-85316-3
    (nygreangr VFOA 0-671-79739-5; Nznmba nhqvb qbjaybnq eryrnfrq 1 Whyl 2004,
    VFOA 074354269K)
  Fhzznel: Guvf nhqvb pnffrggr vf n oevrs vagebqhpgvba gb Xyvatba, vagraqrq
    sbe gur gbhevfg gb gur Rzcver. (Hfhnyyl nooerivngrq <PX>.)

]]

  **********************************************************************
****                                                                  ****
***                       PBAIREFNGVBANY XYVATBA                       ***
***                           Ol Znep Bxenaq                           ***
***                                                                    ***
***                                                                    ***
***                 Erpbeqvat, ©1992 Cnenzbhag Cvpgherf                ***
***                     49:36 Zvahgrf Cynlvat Gvzr                     ***
***                                                                    ***
***                         VFOA 0-671-85316-3                         ***
***                     Fvzba & Fpuhfgre Nhqvbjbexf                    ***
***                              Arj Lbex                              ***
***                                                                    ***
***                                                                    ***
***                   Genafpevcgvba, ©1997-2016 menwz                  ***
***                       (Sbe cevingr hfr bayl.)                      ***
****                                                                  ****
  **********************************************************************

V unir nggrzcgrq gb cebbs-ernq guvf grkg nf gubebhtuyl nf cbffvoyr, hfvat
obgu n fcryy purpxvat cebtenz naq tbvat bire gur grkg frireny gvzrf juvyr
yvfgravat gb gur gncr. Ubjrire V nz nvzvat gb pbafgnagyl vzcebir gur
dhnyvgl bs guvf genafpevcgvba, naq nal pbzzragf, fhttrfgvbaf be dhrfgvbaf
ner zbfg jrypbzr. Gurer ner ab znexvatf nf gb jung jnf fcbxra ol jubz ba
gur gncr.

Gur sbyybjvat punenpgref unir fcrpvny zrnavat va guvf genafpevcg:

   {...} Vaqvpngrf n ibvq lbh ner fhccbfrq gb svyy jvgu n Xyvatba cuenfr.
         (bayl hfrq vg gur PX naq CX genafpevcgvbaf).
   *     fheebhaqf nal *rzcunfvmrq* jbeq (abeznyyl jevggra va vgnyvpf,
         nyfb hfrq sbe jbeqf gung ner genafyvgrengrq engure guna
         genafyngrq, fhpu nf *ong'yrgu* be *q'x gntu*).
   #     fheebhaqf nal #aba-fgnaqneq# be #vapbeerpg# Xyvatba (hfrq zbfgyl
         sbe qvnyrpgf be rknzcyrf vyyhfgengvat aba-fgnaqneq cubabybtl be
         vapbeerpg tenzzne).
   <>    fvtavsvrf n cuenfr va Ratyvfu, gung nyfb vf cerfragrq va Xyvatba.
   ""    ner hfrq sbe dhbgngvba znexf. Hfhnyyl gurer vf n qrfpevovat dhbgr
         sebz gur znva grkg, jura ab qverpg genafyngvba vf ninvynoyr va
         gung fbhepr.
   {}    fheebhaqf nyy Xyvatba jbeqf naq cuenfrf (abeznyyl jevggra va
         obyqsnpr).
   [[.]] fheebhaqf zl bja gubhtugf be bcvavbaf, be n trareny pbzzrag nobhg
         fbzrguvat va gur fbhepr (qvfgheovat fbhaq rssrpg ba gur gncrf,
         tenzzngvpny reebe, jrveq genafyngvba, jungrire). Zbfg bsgra guvf
         pbzzrag vf n fvzcyr fbhepr ersrerapr ubjrire.
   ¿?    fheebhaqf cuenfrf be jbeqf jvgu hapregnva fcryyvat, be bgurejvfr
         qbhogshy ragevrf (zbfgyl anzrf fcbxra ba gur gncrf, jubfr
         fcryyvat V unir orra hanoyr gb pbasvez).

Gunaxf sbe pbagevohgvbaf tb gb:
   Znexhf Creffba, Hccfnyn, Fjrqra. (Fbzr fhttrfgvbaf naq pbeerpgvbaf.)

/menwz


   ==========================================
    FVQR BAR: [[24:50 Zvahgrf Cynlvat Gvzr]]
   ==========================================

{ghwdh'pubU DhD.}
   [[<Gur ratvar vf bireurngvat.> (GXQ c.170)]]

{ahtubF wntu.}
   [[<Gur rarzl vf nccebnpuvat.>]]

{punl' when'?}
   [[<Jung ner lbhe beqref?> (GXQ c.170)]]

{Dh'ingyu!}
   [[<#*@!!>]]

{ongyu znUrtu.}
   [[<Jr jvyy qvr jvgu ubabe.>]]

{pun lVtuhF!}
   [[<Trg gur gbecrqbrf ernql.> (FG1)]]

{Fb'jV' lVpuh'Un'!}
   [[<Qrnpgvingr gur pybnxvat qrivpr!> (FG3)]]

{onU!}
   [[<Sver!> (FG1, FG3, GXQ 7.1, c.72)]]

{oVwrtuor'puhtu inw oVUrtu.}
   [[<Fheeraqre be qvr.> (GXQ c.170)]]

{gyuVatna znU.}
   [[<Jr ner Xyvatbaf!>]]

Hagvy erpragyl zrzoref bs gur Srqrengvba qvq abg xabj zhpu nobhg gur
Xyvatba ynathntr orlbaq ubj vg jnf hfrq qhevat onggyrf. Nsgre nyy vg jnf
abg nyy gung ybat ntb gung ubfgvyvgvrf orgjrra gur Xyvatba Rzcver naq gur
Havgrq Srqrengvba bs Cynargf prnfrq. Nygubhtu lbh jbhyq guvax gung na
vagrepunatr bs vqrnf, phygher naq genqvgvbaf jbhyq unir fgnegrq evtug
njnl, Greenaf va cnegvphyne jrer ng svefg n yvggyr eryhpgnag gb ivfvg
Xyvatba cynargf. Ohg nf arjf fcernq nobhg gur fghaavat angheny frggvatf,
naq gehyl snfpvangvat phfgbzf, gbhevfz naq genqr unir ortha gb obbz. Gur
Xyvatba Rzcver unf orpbzr fhpu na vzcbegnag cynlre va vagretnynpgvp
pbzzrepr gung Xyvatba jvyy fbba shysvyy gur ynathntr erdhverzrag ng n
ahzore bs Srqrengvba havirefvgvrf. Nygubhtu yvathvfgf unir orra fghqlvat
Xyvatba sbe fbzr gvzr, ab-bar unf cercnerq n pbhefr fcrpvsvpnyyl sbe
gbhevfgf cynaavat n ivfvg gb gur Xyvatba Rzcver.

Guvf gncr fubhyq ortva gb svyy gung ibvq. Ol yvfgravat naq ercrngvat gur
Xyvatba cuenfrf lbh urne, lbh jvyy dhvpxyl yrnea jung lbh arrq gb xabj gb
trg ol ba nal ivfvg gb gur Rzcver. Pbeerpg cebahapvngvba bs gur jbeqf,
ryrzragnel tenzzne naq fbzr hfrshy rkcerffvbaf. Nyfb, fvapr ynathntr vf
gur xrl gb nal phygher lbh jvyy ortva gb orpbzr snzvyvne jvgu gur evpuarff
bs Xyvatba genqvgvbaf naq oryvrirf. Guvf pbhefr vf n cenpgvpny bar, lbh
jvyy or rkcbfrq gb rirelqnl Xyvatba jbeqf, naq cuenfrf, gung geniryref
svaq zbfg hfrshy. Guvf vf bayl na vagebqhpgvba, ohg vs lbh nccyl lbhefrys,
lbh jvyy or jryy cercnerq sbe znal nqiragherf.

Nf lbh cenpgvpr fcrnxvat, erzrzore, fcrnx Xyvatba *obyqyl*, qb abg or zrrx
be urfvgnag, guvf pbhyq or vagrecergrq nf n fvta bs jrnxarff, n yrff guna
nqzvenoyr genvg nzbat Xyvatbaf. Nyfb, fbzr bs gur fbhaqf ner qvssvphyg gb
gryy ncneg vs lbh qb abg fcrnx hc. N svany jbeq bs jneavat, rkcrpgbengvba,
be fcvggvat, vf n pbzzba fvqr-rssrpg bs fcrnxvat Xyvatba. Hagvy lbh ner
hfrq gb vg, xrrc n ancxva be unaqxrepuvrs arneol.

Abj, <Ner lbh ernql gb fghql Xyvatba?> {gyuVatna Uby QnUnQehc'n'.}

<Tbbq> {znw.}

<Cnl nggragvba!> naq <Pbapragengr!> {lVdVz. lVohF.}

<Fhpprff!> {Dncyn'.}

Yrg hf fgneg jvgu cebahapvngvba. Zbfg Xyvatba fbhaqf jvyy or rnfl sbe lbh
gb fnl, gurl qb abg qvssre zhpu sebz Srqrengvba Fgnaqneq. Ba gur bgure
unaq n srj ner n yvggyr gevpxl, gb yrneaf gurfr fbhaqf, jr jvyy fghql fbzr
bssrafvir Xyvatba jbeqf. Xrrc va zvaq gung Xyvatba phefvat vf pbafvqrerq n
svar neg, n uvtuyl cevmrq ireony fxvyy. Gubfr jub unir tnvarq n znfgrel bs
guvf frtzrag bs Xyvatba ibpnohynel ner terngyl nqzverq. Ng guvf cbvag, qb
abg pbaprea lbhefrys jvgu gur rknpg genafyngvbaf bs gurfr jbeqf. Vs lbh
fcraq gvzr jvgu Xyvatbaf lbh jvyy urne gurz bsgra rabhtu naq pbagrkg jvyy
znxr gur zrnavatf dhvgr pyrne. Sbe abj, whfg pbapragengr ba cebabhapvat
gurz pbeerpgyl.

Bxnl, urer'f bhe svefg jbeq. Guvf vf fbzrguvat lbh zvtug urne fbzrbar fnl
va zbzragf bs rkgerzr natre:
   {Dh'ingyu}

Or pbaprearq vs lbh urne vg, ohg fnl vg pbeerpgyl vs lbh fnl vg. Gur jbeq
ortvaf jvgu gur pbzzba Xyvatba fbhaq {D}. Gb znxr guvf fbhaq, chg gur onpx
bs lbhe gbathr nf sne onpx vagb lbhe zbhgu nf lbh pna, gura sbepr gur nve
hc unefuyl, nf vs lbh'er gelvat gb qvfybqtr n cvrpr bs sbbq. Yvfgra:
   {D}, {D}, {D}.

Abj fnl vg nybat jvgu zr:
   {D}, {D}, {D}.

Naq abj yvfgra gb gur jbeq ntnva:
   {Dh'ingyu}

Qvq lbh urne gur fbhaqf phg bss noehcgyl va gur zvqqyr bs gur jbeq? Gur
pbeerpg cebahapvngvba vf {Dh'ingyu}, abg {#Dhingyu#}. Guvf noehcg phg-bss
vf n *irel pbzzba* srngher bs Xyvatba, lbh'yy urne vg *n ybg*. Abj urer'f
gur jbeq, bar zber gvzr, yvfgra cnegvphyneyl gb gur ynfg fbhaq va gur
jbeq.
   {Dh'ingyu}

Gb znxr guvf {gyu} fbhaq fnl n "g" naq ng gur fnzr gvzr juvfcre, ybhqyl,
ohg fgvyy whfg juvfcre, na "y". Yvfgra:
   {gyu}, {gyu}, {gyu}.

Abj gel vg nybat jvgu zr:
   {gyu}, {gyu}, {gyu}.

Qb lbh srry gur fvqrf bs lbhe gbathr tbvat qbja nf lbh fnl gur fbhaq? --
Lbh fubhyq. Abj lbh'er ernql gb fnl gur shyy jbeq. Ercrng vg nsgre lbh
urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr:
   {Dh'ingyu}
   {Dh'ingyu}
   {...}

Guvf arkg jbeq vf fbzrguvat bar Xyvatba jbhyq pnyy nabgure, vs gurl
jrera'g ba gur orfg bs grezf.
   {gbQFnU}

Gur fbhaq ng gur raq bs gur svefg flyynoyr bs guvf jbeq, {gbQ}, vf {Q}. Gb
znxr guvf fbhaq, cbvag gur gvc bs lbhe gbathr qverpgyl hcjneq, naq gbhpu
gur uneq cneg bs gur ebbs bs lbhe zbhgu, naq gura qb gur fnzr guvat lbh
jbhyq qb gb znxr n "q" fbhaq. Qb vg nybat jvgu zr:
   {Q}, {Q}, {Q}

Abj yvfgra gb gur jbeq ntnva, sbphfvat ba gur frpbaq flyynoyr:
   {gbQFnU}

Gur fbhaq ng gur ortvaavat bs gur frpbaq flyynoyr, {FnU}, vf {F}. Vg'f abg
dhvgr rvgure gur "f" be gur "fu" fbhaqf lbh'er snzvyvne jvgu. Sbe gur
Xyvatba {F}, chg lbhe gbathr va gur fnzr cynpr lbh qvq gb znxr gur {Q}
fbhaq, naq fnl vg jvgu zr:
   {F}, {F}, {F}.

Urer'f gur jbeq, bar zber gvzr, yvfgra gb gur irel raq.
   {gbQFnU}

Gur ynfg fbhaq va gur jbeq vf {U}, guvf vf gur fnzr nf gur fbhaq ng gur
raq bs gur anzr bs gur napvrag Greena pbzcbfre "Onpu". Lbh znxr vg gur
fnzr jnl lbh'q znxr n "x" fbhaq, ohg sbepr nve bhg bs lbhe zbhgu ng gur
fnzr gvzr. Fnl vg nybat jvgu zr:
   {U}, {U}, {U}.

Abj lbh pna fnl gur jubyr jbeq. Ercrng vg nsgre lbh urne vg gur frpbaq
gvzr.
   {gbQFnU}
   {gbQFnU}
   {...}

Urer'f nabgure jbeq jvgu fgebat sbepr. N Xyvatba zvtug fnl vg nsgre
erprvivat na hafrggyvat pbzzhavdhé. Vg'f n ybg fgebatre gung gur Greena
"Qnea vg!"
   {tuhl'pun'}

Gur svefg fbhaq bs gur jbeq vf {tu}. Vg'f gur fnzr nf gur ynfg fbhaq bs
{gbQFnU}, ohg uhz juvyr lbh fnl vg. Fnl vg jvgu zr:
   {tu}, {tu}, {tu}.

Guvf jbeq nyfb unf gung noehcg phg-bss bs fbhaq gung lbh urneq va
{Dh'ingyu}, ohg vg unf vg ng gur raq nf jryy. Yvfgra:
   {tuhl'pun'}.

Gur pbeerpg cebahapvngvba bs guvf jbeq vf {tuhl'pun'}, abg {#tuhlpun#}.
Fbzrgvzrf gur noehcg phggvat bss bs gur fbhaq vf gur bayl jnl gb
qvfgvathvfu bar jbeq sebz nabgure, yvfgra gb gurfr gjb jbeqf:
   {gV} -- {gV'}

Gur svefg jbeq zrnaf <irtrgngvba>, gur frpbaq zrnaf <gb ercnve>. Yvfgra
ntnva:
   {gV} -- {gV'}

Urne gur qvssrerapr? Abj lbh gel vg. Ercrng nsgre zr:
   {gV} -- {gV'}
   {...}

Tbbq. Abj lbh pna fnl gur Xyvatba phefr. Bapr ntnva, ercrng vg nsgre lbh
urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr:
   {tuhl'pun'}
   {tuhl'pun'}

Vs lbh pnyy fbzrbar guvf arkg jbeq, fgnaq onpx. Guvf vf *n pynffvp*
vafhyg:
   {gnUdrd}

Gurer'f n arj fbhaq ng obgu gur ortvaavat naq raq bs gur frpbaq flyynoyr
{drd}, or pnershy, guvf vf abg gur Srqrengvba Fgnaqneq "x" fbhaq. Lbh znxr
vg yvxr n "x" ohg nf lbh qvq sbe {D}, fubir gur onpx bs lbhe gbathr nf sne
onpx vagb lbhe zbhgu nf lbh pna. Yvfgra:
   {d}, {d}, {d}.

Abj fnl vg nybat jvgu zr:
   {d}, {d}, {d}.

Abj ercrng gur jubyr jbeq, nsgre lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr.
   {gnUdrd}
   {gnUdrd}
   {...}

<Tbbq.> {znw.}

Abj lbh unir yrnearq gb cebabhapr gur qvssvphyg Xyvatba fbhaqf, naq lbh
unir nyfb orra vagebqhprq gb gur uvtuyl ertneqrq phfgbz bs Xyvatba
phefvat. Lbh cebonoyl arrq n erfg. Guvf zvtug or n tbbq gvzr gb ercyravfu
lbhe ancxva fhccyl. Yrg hf gnxr n <fubeg oernx>, n {yraUbz}.

[[# znex #]]

<Fgneg fghqlvat ntnva!> {lVUnQdn'.}

Orsber trggvat vagb rira ryrzragnel tenzzne, lbh fubhyq yrnea fbzr onfvp
rirelqnl rkcerffvbaf, fb gung lbh pna fgneg gnyxvat evtug njnl. Svefg,
urer ner fbzr ernyyl fvzcyr, ohg vzcbegnag jbeqf. Ercrng rnpu bar nsgre
lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr. Bxnl? Urer jr tb:

<Lrf.>
   {UVwn'.}
   {UVwn'.}
   {...}

<Ab.>
   {tubor'.}
   {tubor'.}
   {...}

<Bxnl.> va gur frafr bs <Bxnl, V'yy qb vg.>
   {yh'.}
   {yh'.}
   {...}

Abj, sbe fbzr cuenfrf. Erzrzore, gur Xyvatba phygher vf n irel qverpg bar naq
zbfg bs gur gvzr gur fbpvny avprgvrf bs Greenaf ner pbafvqrerq whfg
fhcresyhbhf. Hayvxr bgure crbcyrf, Xyvatbaf qb abg hfr rirelqnl rkcerffvbaf
fhpu nf: <Cyrnfr.> <Rkphfr zr.> <Gunax lbh.> naq nyvxr. Va qrnyvat jvgu
Xyvatbaf, whfg fgngr lbhe ohfvarff, ab zber, naq ab yrff. Guvf vf abg
pbafvqrerq vzcbyvgr be pehqr. Gur qverpgarff bs Xyvatba vagrenpgvbaf rkgraqf gb
gurve terrgvatf, gurer vf *bayl bar*:
   {ahdarU.}
   {ahdarU.}
   {...}

Yvgrenyyl guvf zrnaf <Jung qb lbh jnag?> Gb Greenaf guvf znl frrz n gnpgyrff
jnl gb ortva n pbairefngvba, ohg nzbat Xyvatbaf vg vf pbafvqrerq dhvgr pvivy.

Rabhtu bs gur sbeznyvgvrf. Yrg'f zbir ba gb fvzcyr dhrfgvbaf. Gur jbeq sbe
<jub?> vf:
   {'Vi.}
   {'Vi.}
   {...}

Sbe rknzcyr: <Jub ner lbh?>
   {FbU 'Vi.}
   {FbU 'Vi.}
   {...}

Arkg: <Jung?>
   {ahd.}
   {ahd.}
   {...}

<Jung vf guvf?>
   {Qbpuinz ahd.}
   {Qbpuinz ahd.}
   {...}

<Jurer?>
   {ahdQnd.}
   {ahdQnd.}
   {...}

<Jurer vf gur onguebbz?>
   {ahdQnd 'bU chpucn''r'.}
   {ahdQnd 'bU chpucn''r'.}
   {...}

<Jura?>
   {tubetu.}
   {tubetu.}
   {...}

<Jura qb jr yrnir?>
   {tubetu znzrw.}
   {tubetu znzrw.}
   {...}

<Jul?>
   {dngyu.}
   {dngyu.}
   {...}

<Jul vf ur natel?>
   {dngyu DrU.}
   {dngyu DrU.}
   {...}

<Ubj znal?> be <Ubj zhpu?>
   {'ne.}
   {'ne.}
   {...}

<Ubj znal thneqf ner pbzvat?>
   {zhtubF 'nijV' 'ne.}
   {zhtubF 'nijV' 'ne.}
   {...}

<Ubj zhpu shry qb jr unir yrsg?>
   {aVa 'ne jVtunw.}
   {aVa 'ne jVtunw.}
   {...}

Arkg, urer ner fbzr cuenfrf gung lbh'yy cebonoyl hfr n ybg, fb vg'f jbegu
yrneavat gurz jryy. Svefg:

<Qb lbh fcrnx Srqrengvba Fgnaqneq?>
   {QViV' Uby Qnwngyu'n'.}
   {QViV' Uby Qnwngyu'n'.}
   {...}

<V qba'g fcrnx Xyvatba.>
   {gyuVatna Uby iVwngyuor'.}
   {gyuVatna Uby iVwngyuor'.}
   {...}

<V haqrefgnaq.>
   {wVlnw.}
   {wVlnw.}
   {...}

<V qba'g haqrefgnaq.>
   {wVlnwor'.}
   {wVlnwor'.}
   {...}

Svanyyl, whfg gb trg lbh tbvat, n srj pbzzba jbeqf, va cnvef:

<Ovt> -- <Fznyy>
   {gVa} -- {znpu}
   {gVa} -- {znpu}
   {...}

<Rneyl> -- <Yngr>
   {'rd} -- {cnF}
   {'rd} -- {cnF}
   {...}

<Arne> -- <Sne>
   {Fhz} -- {Ubc}
   {Fhz} -- {Ubc}
   {...}

<Ubg> -- <Pbyq>
   {ghw} -- {oVe}
   {ghw} -- {oVe}
   {...}

<Purnc> -- <Rkcrafvir>
   {dhgyu} -- {jntu}
   {dhgyu} -- {jntu}
   {...}

<Tbbq> -- <Onq>
   {znw} -- {dno}
   {znw} -- {dno}
   {...}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Gur bccbfvgr bs {dno} vf {DnD} <or tbbq>, *abg* {znw}.
Gur ernfba gung {znw} gb bpphef urer vf, bs pbhefr, vgf serdhrag hfr
guebhtubhg gur gncr, ohg {znw} ernyyl zrnaf <tbbq> bayl jura rkcerffvat
fngvfsnpgvba. -- N ovg yvxr fnlvat <V nz fngvfsvrq.>]]

Bxnl, gung jvyy qb sbe ceryvzvanevrf. Jvgu jung lbh unir yrnearq fb sne,
naq ol cbvagvat, lbh fubhyq or noyr gb trg ol, ohg vs lbh jnag gb qb zber
guna whfg *trg ol* lbh jvyy unir gb yrnea fbzr tenzzne. Fb arkg, yvfgra gb
guvf fubeg qvnybthr. Jura vg vf bire, jr jvyy erivrj vg, sbe cebabha hfr.

Va guvf qvnybthr n Xyvatba jneevbe naq n Greena gbhevfg fgevxr hc n
pbairefngvba. Abj <Cnl nggragvba!> {lVdVz.} Yvfgra sbe cebabhaf.

<Jung qb lbh jnag?>
   {ahdarU.}

<Ner lbh n Xyvatba?>
   {gyuVatna FbU'n'.}

<Lrf.>
   {UVwn'.}

<V'z n Greena.>
   {gren'atna wVU.}

Frr? Gung jnf cerggl fubeg. Lbh znl unir n yvggyr gebhoyr cebabhapvat gur
jbeq sbe <Greena>, yvfgra gb vg ntnva:
   {gren'atna}
   {gren'atna}
   {...}

Gur fbhaq ng gur ortvaavat bs gur frpbaq flyynoyr, {atna}, vf gur fnzr nf
gur fbhaq gung pbzrf ng gur raq bs gur jbeq <guvat> be <unat>. Yrg'f
cenpgvpr vg gbtrgure:
   {at}, {at}, {at}.

Yvfgra bapr zber:
   {gren'atna}
   {gren'atna}

Abj lbh fnl vg:
   {gren'atna}
   {gren'atna}
   {...}

Abg onq! Juvyr yvfgravat gb gur pbairefngvba, jrer lbh noyr gb cvpx bhg
gur cebabhaf? Va Xyvatba gurer ner rvtug bs gurz:

<V>
   {wVU}
   {wVU}
   {...}

<Lbh>
   {FbU}
   {FbU}
   {...}

<Ur> be <fur>
   {tunU}
   {tunU}
   {...}

<Vg>
   {'bU}
   {'bU}
   {...}

<Jr>
   {znU}
   {znU}
   {...}

<Nyy bs lbh>
   {gyuVU}
   {gyuVU}
   {...}

<Gurl> ersreevat gb orvatf:
   {punU}
   {punU}
   {...}

Naq svanyyl <gurl> ersreevat gb guvatf:
   {oVU}
   {oVU}
   {...}

Bxnl. Abj yrg'f hfr fbzr bs gur cebabhaf va fragraprf. Ercrng rnpu
fragrapr nsgre lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr.

<V nz n Xyvatba.>
   {gyuVatna wVU.}
   {gyuVatna wVU.}
   {...}

<Lbh ner n Xyvatba.>
   {gyuVatna FbU.}
   {gyuVatna FbU.}
   {...}

<Ur vf n Greena.>
   {gren'atna tunU.}
   {gren'atna tunU.}
   {...}

<Fur vf n Greena.>
   {gren'atna tunU.}
   {gren'atna tunU.}
   {...}

Abgvpr gung gurer jnf ab qvssrerapr va gur jnl gb fnl <ur> naq <fur>.

<Tbbq.> {znw.}

Lbh znl unir abgvprq, gung va rnpu bs gur rknzcyrf, gur cebabha pbzrf ng
gur raq. Fbzr Greenaf svaq guvf pbashfvat, ohg sbe n Xyvatba gur beqre vf
dhvgr angheny. Trg hfrq gb vg!

Gur shyy flfgrz bs Xyvatba cebabhaf vf dhvgr pbzcyvpngrq. Gurer vf nabgure
frg hfrq whfg gb rkcerff fgngrf, be dhnyvgvrf, gurer ner bayl sbhe bs
gurfr cebabhaf, naq hayvxr gur jbeqf lbh whfg yrnearq, gurl pbzr ng gur
ortvaavat bs na rkcerffvba.

Gurfr cebabhaf ner:

<V>
   {wV-}
   {wV-}
   {...}

<Lbh>
   {oV-}
   {oV-}
   {...}

<Jr>
   {zn-}
   {zn-}
   {...}

<Nyy bs lbh>
   {Fh-}
   {Fh-}
   {...}

Sbe <ur>, <fur>, <vg> naq <gurl> fnl abguvat ng nyy. Abj, yrg'f chg gurfr
cebabhaf vagb fragraprf:

<V'z uhatel.>
   {wVtuhat.}
   {wVtuhat.}
   {...}

<Lbh'er evtug.>
   {oVyhtu.}
   {oVyhtu.}
   {...}

<Ur vf yngr.>
   {cnF.}
   {cnF.}
   {...}

Gur jbeq sbe <yngr> vf {cnF}. Abgvpr gung abguvat urer'f nqqrq gb vaqvpngr
<ur>. Gb fnl <Ur vf yngr.> whfg fnl {cnF.}

<Fur vf rneyl.>
   {'rd.}
   {'rd.}
   {...}

Ntnva, gur jbeq sbe <rneyl> vf {'rd}, naq gurer vf ab fcrpvny cebabha
nqqrq sbe <fur>. Guvf vf nyfb gur pnfr sbe <vg> naq sbe <gurl>.

<Jr'er guvefgl.>
   {zn'bw.}
   {zn'bw.}
   {...}

<Nyy bs lbh ner obevat.>
   {FhQny.}
   {FhQny.}
   {...}

<Gurl'er fybccl.>
   {tuVU.}
   {tuVU.}
   {...}

<Jryy qbar.> {znwDn'.}

Arkg, jr jvyy zbir ba gb zber dhrfgvbaf. Nf n gbhevfg lbh jvyy cebonoyl
arrq gb nfx dhrfgvbaf serdhragyl. Or pnershy abg gb nfx gb znal dhrfgvbaf
ng bapr gubhtu. Xyvatbaf ner fhfcvpvbhf ol angher naq gurl znl ortva gb
jbaqre nobhg lbhe zbgvingvbaf. Gb sbez n dhrfgvba jubfr nafjre vf <lrf> be
<ab>, whfg nqq {-'n'}.

Va guvf qvnybthr n Greena gbhevfg unf whfg neevirq ba Xebabf, be {Db'abF},
gur ubzr cynarg bs gur Xyvatba Rzcver. Ng gur phfgbzf tngr n thneq vf
dhrfgvbavat uvz. <Cnl nggragvba!> {lVdVz.}

<Ner lbh n Greena?>
   {gren'atna FbU'n'.}

<Lrf. V'z n Greena.>
   {UVwn'. gren'atna wVU.}

<Ner lbh inpngvbavat ba Xebabf?>
   {Db'abFQnd oVtuVD'n'.}

<Lrf. V nz inpngvbavat ba Xebabf.>
   {UVwn'. Db'abFQnd wVtuVD.}

<Qb lbh xabj nalbar urer?>
   {anQri inl' QnFbi'n'.}

<Ab. V qba'g xabj nalbar urer.>
   {tubor'. anQri inl' iVFbior'.}

<Ner lbh genafcbegvat gevooyrf?>
   {lVUzrl QVUVw'n'.}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Fvp! Nf sne nf V pna urne Bxenaq vf ernyyl fnlvat
{QVUVw'n'} <Ner jr genafcbegvat gurz?> gubhtu guvf ernyyl fubhyq or
{QnUVw'n'.} <Ner lbh genafcbegvat gurz?>.]]

<Ab. V'z abg genafcbegvat gevooyrf.>
   {tubor'. lVUzrl iVUVwor'.}

Vg'f bxnl gb nafjre dhrfgvbaf yvxr gurfr ol fvzcyl fnlvat <lrf> {UVwn'} be
<ab> {tubor'} naq abguvat zber. Ohg qba'g nafjre nal dhrfgvba hayrff
lbh'er fher lbh haqrefgnaq jung vg zrnaf. Qver pbafrdhraprf pbhyq erfhyg
sebz na vanccebcevngr erfcbafr. Vs lbh qba'g haqrefgnaq n dhrfgvba, whfg
fnl {ahdwngyu.} Guvf vf n irel hfrshy rkcerffvba, vg zrnaf <Jung qvq lbh
fnl?> be <Uhu?>. Lbh gel vg. Ercrng vg nsgre lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr:
   {ahdwngyu.}
   {ahdwngyu.}
   {...}

Gung vf pybfr. Lbh fubhyq cebonoyl cenpgvpr fnlvat guvf jbeq, hagvy lbh
ner pbzsbegnoyr jvgu vg, vg vf nabgure bar lbh jvyy cebonoyl hfr dhvgr n
ovg. Abj <Erynk!> {lVyrF.}

<Fgbc erynkvat!> {lVyrFUn'.}

Jr ner zbivat ba gb ahzoref. Nf va Srqrengvba Fgnaqneq gur onfvp pbhag va
Xyvatba vf bar gb gra. Ybat ntb Xyvatbaf pbhagrq ol guerrf, fb gur ahzore
nsgre guerr jnf yvgrenyyl <guerr cyhf bar>, sbe <frira> gurl jbhyq fnl
<gjb guerrf cyhf bar> naq fb ba. Sbeghangryl sbe hf, bire gvzr, gur flfgrz
punatrq, cebonoyl qhr gb vagrenpgvbaf jvgu bgure jbeyqf naq n qrfver gb
yrnea nobhg nqinaprq grpuabybtl. Va nal rirag, pbhagvat fubhyq abg or gbb
uneq sbe lbh. Ernql? Urer jr tb:

<Bar>
   {jn'}
   {jn'}
   {...}

<Gjb>
   {pun'}
   {pun'}
   {...}

<Guerr>
   {jrw}
   {jrw}
   {...}

<Sbhe>
   {ybF}
   {ybF}
   {...}

<Svir>
   {intu}
   {intu}
   {...}

<Fvk>
   {wni}
   {wni}
   {...}

<Frira>
   {Fbpu}
   {Fbpu}
   {...}

<Rvtug>
   {pubetu}
   {pubetu}
   {...}

<Avar>
   {Uhg}
   {Uhg}
   {...}

<Gra>
   {jn'znU}
   {jn'znU}
   {...}

Ahzoref, bs pbhefr, ner hfrq gb pbhag guvatf, naq jura gurer vf zber guna
bar guvat, gurer ner cyhenyf. Gurer ner guerr jnlf gb znxr cyhenyf va
Xyvatba. Svefg, gb sbez gur cyheny bs n jbeq yvxr <Xyvatba>, whfg nqq
{-ch'} gb gur jbeq. Gur fhssvk {-ch'} vf hfrq bayl gb sbez gur cyheny bs
orvatf gung pna hfr ynathntr.

Bar <Xyvatba> vf:
   {gyuVatna}

Gjb be zber <Xyvatbaf> ner:
   {gyuVatnach'}

N fvatyr <Greena> vf:
   {gren'atna}

Gjb be zber ner:
   {gren'atnach'}

Sbe obql cnegf, hfr {-Qh'}:

N fvatyr unaq vf:
   {tubc}

Zber guna bar unaq vf:
   {tubcQh'}

Gb sbez gur cyheny bs fbzrguvat gung arvgure fcrnxf abe vf n obql cneg,
hfr {-zrl}.

N fvatyr <cunfre> vf:
   {ch'UVpu}

Zber guna bar cunfre vf:
   {ch'UVpuzrl}


   ==========================================
    FVQR GJB: [[23:20 Zvahgrf Cynlvat Gvzr]]
   ==========================================

Abj, jr'yy chg gur ahzoref naq cyhenyf gbtrgure. Ercrng rnpu cuenfr nsgre
lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr. Yrg'f pbhag:

<Bar Xyvatba>
   {jn' gyuVatna}
   {jn' gyuVatna}
   {...}

<Gjb Xyvatbaf>
   {pun' gyuVatnach'}
   {pun' gyuVatnach'}
   {...}

<Guerr *oenir* Xyvatbaf>
   {jrw gyuVatnach' lbU}
   {jrw gyuVatnach' lbU}
   {...}

<Sbhe cunfref>
   {ybF ch'UVpuzrl}
   {ybF ch'UVpuzrl}
   {...}

<Svir cunfref>
   {intu ch'UVpuzrl}
   {intu ch'UVpuzrl}
   {...}

<Fvk *ovt* cunfref>
   {wni ch'UVpuzrl gVa}
   {wni ch'UVpuzrl gVa}
   {...}

<Frira sberurnqf>
   {Fbpu DhpuQh'}
   {Fbpu DhpuQh'}
   {...}

<Rvtug *ornhgvshy* sberurnqf>
   {pubetu DhpuQh' 'VU}
   {pubetu DhpuQh' 'VU}
   {...}

<Avar gevooyrf>
   {Uhg lVUzrl}
   {Uhg lVUzrl}
   {...}

<Gra *hfryrff* gevooyrf>
   {jn'znU lVUzrl yV'or'}
   {jn'znU lVUzrl yV'or'}
   {...}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Gur GXQ (c.50) rkcyvpvgyl abgrf gung "[...] jura hfrq gb
zbqvsl gur abha va guvf jnl, [n ireo] pna unir ab bgure fhssvk rkprcg gur ebire
{-dh'} <rzcungvp>." Rvgure guvf vf na reebe, na rkprcgvba gb gur ehyr, be n arj
ehyr. Tb svther gung bhg!]]

Fbzrgvzrf lbh jvyy arrq gb hfr ynetre ahzoref. Sbe zhygvcyrf bs <gra>,
yvxr <gjragl>, <guvegl> naq fb ba, nqq {-znU}. Sbe rknzcyr <gjragl> vf
<gjb> {pun'} cyhf {-znU}, {pun'znU}. Sbe uhaqerqf, nqq {-ingyu}. Sbe
rknzcyr <svir uhaqerq> vf <svir> {intu} cyhf uhaqerq {-ingyu},
{intuingyu}. Sbe gubhfnaqf, nqq {-FnQ}. <Guerr gubhfnaq> vf <guerr> {jrw}
cyhf <gubhfnaq> {-FnQ}, {jrwFnQ}.

Lbh gel fbzr. Ercrng gur ynetr ahzore nsgre lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr:

<Sbegl>
   {ybFznU}
   {ybFznU}
   {...}

<Frira uhaqerq>
   {Fbpuingyu}
   {Fbpuingyu}
   {...}

<Avar gubhfnaq>
   {UhgFnQ}
   {UhgFnQ}
   {...}

Svanyyl, gur jbeq sbe <mreb>:
   {cntu}
   {cntu}
   {...}

{znw.} Abj lbh ner ernql sbe uvture zngurzngvpf. Lbh ner nyfb ernql gb
gryy gvzr. Xyvatbaf unir nqbcgrq gur jnl zbfg pvivyvmrq cynargf va gur
Tnynkl gryy gvzr, gurl unir gjragl-sbhe ubhe qnlf. <Mreb ubhef> zrnaf
zvqavtug, <gjryir uhaqerq ubhef> zrnaf abba, <avargrra uhaqerq ubhef>
zrnaf frira c.z., naq fb ba. Xyvatbaf cevqr gurzfryirf ba chapghnyvgl, fb
vg vf vzcbegnag gb or cerpvfr jura ersreevat gb gvzr. Gubhtu Xyvatbaf ner
fbzrgvzrf vanpphengr, gurl ner *arire* nccebkvzngr.

Gur jbeq sbe <ubhe> va Xyvatba vf {erc}. <Fvk uhaqerq ubhef> be fvk
b'pybpx va gur zbeavat vf <fvk> {wni} cyhf <uhaqerq> {-ingyu} cyhf {erc},
nygbtrgure vg'f {wniingyu erc}.

Abj, lbh ercrng gurfr gvzr rkcerffvbaf, nsgre lbh urne rnpu bar gur frpbaq
gvzr:

Abba be <gjryir uhaqerq ubhef>:
   {pun'znU jn'ingyu erc}
   {pun'znU jn'ingyu erc}
   {...}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: {pun'znU jn'ingyu erc} vf dhvgr boivbhfyl jebat, nf
vg zrnaf <gjragl bar uhaqerq ubhef>, guvf jnf qhyl abgrq ol (nzbat
bguref) Arny Fpurezreubea va {UbyDrQ} 2:3 (cntr 14). Gur fragrapr fubhyq
unir orra {jn'znU pun'ingyu erc}.]]

Zvqavtug be <mreb ubhef>:
   {cntu erc}
   {cntu erc}
   {...}

Frira c.z. be <avargrra uhaqerq ubhef>
   {jn'znU Uhgingyu erc}
   {jn'znU Uhgingyu erc}
   {...}

Nygubhtu Xyvatbaf gryy gvzr gur jnl zbfg bs gur erfg bs gur Tnynkl qbrf,
gur Xyvatba qnl ernyyl tbrf sebz qnja gb qnja, engure guna sebz zvqavtug
gb zvqavtug. Lbh zvtug guvax guvf pbhyq pnhfr fbzr pbashfvba, ohg vg vf
ernyyl pbzcnenoyr gb jura n Greena fnlf fbzrguvat yvxr, <Guhefqnl avtug,
ng guerr b'pybpx va gur zbeavat>. Ornevat gung va zvaq urer ner gur jbeqf
sbe <lrfgreqnl>, <gbqnl> naq <gbzbeebj>:

<Lrfgreqnl>
   {jn'Uh'}
   {jn'Uh'}
   {...}

<Lrfgreqnl V jnf uhatel.>
   {jn'Uh' wVtuhat.}
   {jn'Uh' wVtuhat.}
   {...}

<Gbqnl>
   {QnUwnw}
   {QnUwnw}
   {...}

<Gbqnl V nz guvefgl.>
   {QnUwnw wV'bw.}
   {QnUwnw wV'bw.}
   {...}

<Gbzbeebj>
   {jn'yrF}
   {jn'yrF}
   {...}

<Gbzbeebj V'yy or gverq.>
   {jn'yrF wVQbl'.}
   {jn'yrF wVQbl'.}
   {...}

<Jryy qbar.> {znwDn'.}

Abj, sbe n zbzrag <Lbh fubhyq erynk!> {lVyrF.}

[[# znex #]]

<Onpx gb jbex!> {lVihzdn'.}

Jura ivfvgvat n Xyvatba cynarg gur svefg guvat lbh jvyy jnag gb qb, bapr
lbh unir svavfu nafjrevat gur thneqf dhrfgvbaf, vf erag n ebbz. Ab znggre
jurer lbh fgnl gur nppbzzbqngvbaf jvyy or fgnex pbzcnerq gb jung lbh ner
hfrq gb. Xyvatbaf ner cerqvfcbfrq gb erwrpgvat nalguvat jubfr fbyr
shapgvba vf culfvpny pbzsbeg. Gurl jvyy, ubjrire, znxr fbzr pbaprffvbaf
sbe ivfvgbef. Sbe rknzcyr, lbhe ebbz jvyy nyzbfg pregnvayl or rdhvccrq
jvgu n orq, gubhtu vg vf yvxryl gb or znqr bs gur fnzr zngrevny nf gur
sybbe. Purpxvat vagb lbhe ebbz vf n cnvayrff cebprqher, nf ybat nf lbh
unir znqr erfreingvbaf nurnq bs gvzr. Fvzcyl vqragvsl lbhefrys gb gur qrfx
pyrex. Urer vf n glcvpny fprar: {lVdVz.}

<Jung vf lbhe ahzore, Greena?>
   {ahd zV'yVw, gren'atna.}

<V'z thrfg ahzore sbegl-gjb.>
   {zro ybFznU pun' wVU.}

<Jr'er rkcrpgvat lbh.>
   {cVcVU.}

<Lbhe ebbz vf ahzore gjragl-guerr.>
   {cn' pun'znU jrw 'bU cn'yVw'r'.}

<Gur orq vf irel uneq.>
   {yrgdh' DbatQnd.}

<Gur ebbz unf ab ivrj.>
   {cn'ib' cntu yrtuyh'.}
   [[Yvg. <Abguvat vf frra sebz gur ebbz.> GXQ c.39]]

<Purpx-bhg gvzr vf svir n.z.>
   {intu erc oVzrwaVF.}
   [[Yvg. <Lbh arrq gb yrnir ng svir ubhef.>]]

<Cnl abj!>
   {QnU lVQVy.}

<Cvpx hc lbhe onttntr naq tb gb lbhe ebbz!>
   {grcyVw lVjbU 'rw cn'yVwQnd lVwnU.}

Va gur ubgry lbh jvyy unir gb qb rirelguvat lbhefrys. Qb abg rkcrpg gb
svaq ubhfrxrrcvat be ebbz freivpr rvgure, juvyr guvf znl or n yvggyr
vapbairavrag, vg vf nyfb varkcrafvir. Gurer vf arire nal arrq gb gvc.

Nf nppbzzbqngvat nf vg vf, lbh jvyy abg jnag gb fcraq nyy bs lbhe gvzr va
lbhe ebbz. Lbh zvtug jnag gb trg bhg naq tb fubccvat. Nf lbh ybbx vagb
inevbhf fgberf lbh jvyy fbba qvfpbire gung gurer vf irel yvggyr gb ohl
rkprcg sbe sbbq naq jrncbaf, naq gurfr sbe gur zbfg pna abg or gnxra bhg
bs gur Rzcver. Vs fbzrubj lbh svaq fbzrguvat lbh ner crezvggrq gb ohl,
fhpu nf sbbq lbh pna rng evtug njnl, lbh jvyy arrq gb xabj ubj gb nfx bayl
bar dhrfgvba: <Ubj zhpu?> {'ne.}

Gur nafjre gb guvf dhrfgvba jvyy or gur ahzore bs perqvgf arrqrq gb
chepunfr gur vgrz. Sbe rknzcyr: <bar perqvg> {jn' QrD}.

Gurer vf ab unttyvat, gurer vf nyfb ab oebjfvat. N pbzzba fnlvat nzbat
Xyvatba zrepunagf vf <Ohl be qvr.> {oVwr'or'puhtu inw oVUrtu.}

Vs n zrepunag fnlf guvf gb lbh, fcraqvat n srj perqvgf gb ohl gur svefg
guvat lbh frr vf cebonoyl n tbbq vqrn. Vafgrnq bs fubccvat, gel fcraqvat
gur qnl ivfvgvat vagrerfgvat fvgrf. Rira gubhtu gbhevfz unf orpbzr n cneg
bs rirelqnl yvsr naq vf rapbhentrq ol gur tbireazrag, Xyvatbaf ner fgvyy n
yvggyr harnfl nobhg ivfvgbe jnaqrevat nebhaq serryl. Vs lbh jnag gb frr
nalguvat lbh jvyy unir gb gnxr n gbhe. Gur arkg qvnybthr pbagnvaf fbzr
cuenfrf juvpu jvyy or hfrshy jura lbh tb fvtugfrrvat. {lVdVz.}

<V jnag gb ivfvg fbzr cynpr.>
   {ibtu iVFhpu iVarU.}

<V jnag gb ivfvg gur Terng Unyy bs gur Uvtu Pbhapvy.>
   {lrwdhi inF'n' iVFhpu iVarU.}

<V jnag gb ivfvg gur qvyvguvhz zvarf.>
   {pun'chw gyuVyUny iVFhpu iVarU.}

<Gurfr cynprf ner arneol, Greena.>
   {Fhz Qndzrlinz, gren'atna.}

<Pna V jnyx gurer?>
   {cn' wVlVg'n'.}

<Ab. Lbh zhfg evqr gur wvgarl.>
   {tubor'. yhcjV' QnyVtuaVF.}

<Trg va naq fgnaq gurer!>
   {lVlbat 'rw cn' lVDnz.}

<V pna'g frr jryy sebz urer.>
   {anQriib' wVyrtuynUpuh'or'.}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: {anQriib' wVyrtuynUpuh'or'.} yvgrenyyl zrnaf
fbzrguvat yvxr <Sebz urer, V pna frr, ohg abg cresrpgyl.> Arny
Fpurezreubea fhttrfgrq (va {UbyDrQ} 2:3 c.14) gung n orggre genafyngvba
zvtug or {anQriib' wVyrtuynUor'puh'.} yvgrenyyl <Sebz urer, V pna
cresrpgyl abg frr.> V qvfnterr jvgu guvf bcvavba.]]

<Jr'er cnffvat n cbjre trarengbe.>
   {UbF yVatjV' jVwhF.}

<Vg'f ornhgvshy, vfa'g vg?>
   {'VU, dne'n'.}

<Abj V pna fzryy fbzrguvat.>
   {QnU inl' iVynetuynU.}

<Zl rlrf fgvat.>
   {zh'nj' zVaQh'jVw.}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: {zh'nj' zVaQh'jVw.} yvgrenyyl zrnaf <Zl rlrf fgvat zr.>
(va gur fnzr frafr nf n xavsr pna fgvat zr). Arny Fpurezreubea unf fhttrfgrq
(va {UbyDrQ} 2:3 c.14) gung gur fragrapr {yh'nj'yh' zVaQh'jVw.} zvtug or n orggre
genafyngvba. Ncneg sebz gur beqre bs gur jbeqf V nterr.  Vg vf gur bowrpg bs
gur *ireo cersvk* gung orpbzrf gur fhowrpg bs gur fragrapr jura {-yh'}
<vaqrsvavgr fhowrpg> vf hfrq. Gur jbeq beqre erznvaf gur fnzr, nf vf pyrneyl
qrzbafgengrq va gur rknzcyr {anQri chdch' gh'yh'.} <Gurer ner puvyqera urer.>
va GXQ c.39. Obgu {zVaQh'jVw yh'nj'yh'.} <Zl rlrf fgvat.> be <Fbzrbar/fbzrguvat
fgvatf zl rlrf.> naq gur fvzcyre {'bl' zVaQh'jVw.} <Zl rlrf npur.> (nyfb frra
va XTG c.20) tbbq jnlf gb rkcerff gur fnzr guvat.]]

<Jung vf guvf cynpr?>
   {Qndinz ahd.}

<Gung vf pynffvsvrq vasbezngvba.>
   {crtu Qr'irgyu.}
   [[Yvg. <Gung vasbezngvba vf frperg.>]]

<Jura pna V erghea gb zl ebbz?>
   {tubetu cn'jVwQnd wVpurtu.}

N geniry gvc. Xyvatbaf jvyy trarenyyl nyybj lbh gb znxr ubybtencuvp snpfvzvyrf
bs crbcyr, ohg fbzr bs gur cynprf lbh jvyy pbzr npebff ner pbafvqrerq fnperq,
be erfgevpgrq, naq fubhyq abg or ercyvpngrq. N zvfwhqtzrag ba lbh cneg pbhyq
yrnq gb hasbeghangr pbafrdhraprf, vapyhqvat vapneprengvba, juvpu pbhyq ehva
lbhe inpngvba. Qb abg thrff, nyjnlf nfx.

Nf lbh gbhe nebhaq, lbh znl jnag gb rkcerff ernpgvbaf gb jung lbh frr, fb urer
ner fbzr hfrshy jbeqf. Or pnershy gubhtu, lbhe inyhrf cebonoyl qb abg zngpu
gubfr bs zbfg Xyvatbaf naq guvf rkgraqf gb gnfgr. Lbh znl abg nccerpvngr, sbe
rknzcyr, jul Xyvatbaf svaq gur cnva raqherq qhevat n svtug fb cyrnfvat, be jul
gurl pbafvqre gur unezbal bs zbfg Greena zhfvp fb bowrpgvbanoyr. Gb nibvq
pbasebagngvba lbh zvtug abg jnag gb rkcerff lbhe bcvavbaf gb whfg nalobql. Abj
ercrng rnpu jbeq, nsgre lbh urne vg gur frpbaq gvzr. {lVdVz.}

<Ornhgvshy>
   {'VU}
   {'VU}
   {...}

<Htyl>
   {zbU}
   {zbU}
   {...}

<Bqq>
   {whz}
   {whz}
   {...}

<Cbjreshy>
   {UbFtunw}
   {UbFtunw}
   {...}

<Fhcrevbe>
   {aVi}
   {aVi}
   {...}

<Vasrevbe>
   {DVi}
   {DVi}
   {...}

<Zrffl>
   {tuVU}
   {tuVU}
   {...}

Nsgre n ohfl qnl bs fvtugfrrvat, lbh jvyy cebonoyl or uhatel. Nf vg gheaf bhg
bar bs gur zber hasbetrggnoyr cnegf bs n ivfvg gb n Xyvatba cynarg, vf
fnzcyvat gur ybpny phvfvar. Gurer ner znal erfgnhenagf gb freir lbh.  Zbfg
Greenaf svaq genqvgvbany Xyvatba sbbq n yvggyr hahfhny, ohg nsgre n juvyr gurl
frrz gb trg hfrq gb vg, naq pbzcnerq jvgu jung gurl freir va gur fznyy rguavp
pnsrf, vg vf qbjaevtug oynaq. Xyvatba erfgnhenag jbexref, pbbxf, freiref,
rirelbar, ner irel urycshy gb aba-Xyvatbaf. Gurl ner cebhq bs gurve phvfvar naq
ernyyl rawbl gnyxvat nobhg vg. Guvf vf bar pnfr jurer lbh jvyy abg unir gb
jbeel nobhg nfxvat gb znal dhrfgvbaf. Va guvf arkg qvnybthr, n Greena gbhevfg
vf trggvat ernql gb beqre Xyvatba sbbq sbe gur svefg gvzr. {lVdVz.}

<Qb lbh haqrefgnaq gur zrah, Greena?>
   {UVQwbyri Qnlnw'n', gren'atna.}

<Ab. Uryc zr.>
   {tubor'. UVobD.}

<Qb lbh gehfg zr?>
   {pubibd'n'.}

<Lrf. V gehfg lbh.>
   {UVwn'. dnibd.}

<V'yy oevat lbh qvaare ahzore guerr.>
   {FbUinQ 'hD jrw iVdrz.}

<V'yy oevat grn, nyfb.>
   {Qnetu iVdrz wr.}

<Bxnl.>
   {yh'.}

<Cnl abj!>
   {QnU lVQVy.}

<Oba nccégvg, Greena.>
   {crFbc, gren'atna.} [[crFbc:=lVFbc]]

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Fvp! Nabgure bs Znep Bxenaq'f fznyy zvfgnxrf. {cr-} vf na
vzcrengvir cersvk hfrq bayl jura gurer vf n *cyheny fhowrpg* naq fvapr gur
Greena frrzf gb or qvavat nybar urer guvf vfa'g gur pnfr. Gur jnvgre fubhyq
unir fnvq {lVFbc, gren'atna.} <Rng, Greena!>]]

<Ubj qb V rng gur sbbq?>
   {punl' Fbw iVFbc.}

<Hfr lbhe unaqf.>
   {tubcQh'yVw lVyb'.}

<Jung vf guvf?>
   {Qbpuinz ahd.}

<Lbh ner rngvat frecrag jbezf.>
   {dntu QnFbc.}

<Gur frecrag jbezf ner zbivat.>
   {iVU dntu.}

<Rng gurz dhvpxyl.>
   {abz lVFbc.}

<Gurer'f sbbq nyy bire zl snpr.>
   {dnojVwQnd Fbw gh'yh'orw.}

<Gura lbh'er boivbhfyl rawblvat vg.>
   {inw QngVion'.}

<Rng gur cvcvhf pynj.>
   {cVclhF cnpu iVFbc.} [[iVFbc:=lVFbc]]

<Vf Xyvatba sbbq nyjnlf enj?>
   {erU gyuby'n' gyuVatna Fbw.}

<Greenaf rawbl rngvat oheag navznyf.>
   {Un'QVonUzrl zrD Fbc 'r' gVi gren'atnach'.}

<Xyvatbaf arire qrfgebl tbbq sbbq.>
   {abg Fbw DnD Dnj' gyuVatnach'.}

Abj gung lbh unir rngra vg vf gvzr sbe fbzr sha. Xyvatbaf chg nf zhpu raretl
vagb gurve erperngvbany npgvivgvrf nf gurl qb vagb znggref bs jnesner. Naq bar
bs gur zbfg cbchyne cynprf gb hajvaq vf gur ybpny one.  Xyvatba onef ner abg
whfg cynprf sbe qevaxvat, juvyr gurer lbh pna nyfb rawbl n fubj, yvfgra gb
zhfvp, cnegvpvcngr va fcbegf, be znxr hfrshy ohfvarff pbagnpgf. N ivfvg gb n
Xyvatba one vf na hasbetrggnoyr rkcrevrapr, naq lbh fubhyq qrsvavgryl qb vg.
Ohg, ng yrnfg gur svefg gvzr, qb abg tb va nybar. Erthyne one cngebaf graq gb
or n yvggyr fhfcvpvbhf bs arj snprf. Gur qrfx pyrex jurer lbh ner fgnlvat
fubhyq or noyr gb ybpngr fbzrbar jub jbhyq or jvyyvat gb nppbzcnal lbh naq
vagebqhpr lbh nf uvf be ure thrfg, be vs lbh pna ernq Xyvatba, tb gb nal
pbzzhavpngvbaf grezvany naq pbafhyg gur qngn onaxf lbhefrys. Hfr gur pngrtbel
<nyvra rfpbeg>, be {abi QbejV'}. Va guvf arkg qvnybthr gur Greena ivfvgbe
ortvaf ol znxvat nccebcevngr neenatrzragf jvgu n Xyvatba fur unf whfg zrg:

<Jvyy lbh rfpbeg zr gb n one?>
   {gnpuQnd pubQbe'n'.}

<Lrf. Pbzr jvgu zr.>
   {UVwn'. UVgyurw.}

<Bxnl. Yrg'f tb!>
   {yh'. Un'.}

<Jul vf gurer ehooyr rireljurer, Xyvatba?>
   {dngyu Qng QV gh'yh', gyuVatna.}

<Onef erfrzoyr jneevbe'f ubzrf.>
   {FhijV' whUzrl ehe gnpuzrl.}

<Jvyy lbh qevax, Greena?>
   {oVgyuhgyu'n', gren'atna?}

<Lrf. Jung vf gurer?>
   {UVwn'. ahd gh'yh'.}

<Gurl freir oynpx nyr, be Erthyna oybbqjvar.>
   {UVd dVw ertuhyhF 'Vj UVd tunc wno.}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Gur fcryyvat bs oybbqjvar {'Vj UVd} jvgu gjb frcnengr jbeqf
vafgrnq bs (nf V jbhyq unir thrffrq) whfg bar {'VjUVd} jnf gnxra sebz XTG (cntr
94). Yvgrenyyl guvf jbhyq zrna <oybbq'f jvar> be <jvar bs oybbq> -- juvpu, bs
pbhefr, pbhyq or pbafvqrerq cebcre fvapr oybbq vf nqqrq "sbe synibe naq
fgeratgu".]]

<Gurl jba'g freir Ebzhyna nyr gb Greenaf, gb cbgrag.>
   {gren'atnainQ ebzhyhF UVd wnoDb'. UbFtunwdh'.}

<V'yy unir gur oynpx nyr.>
   {UVd dVw iVgyuhgyu iVarU.}

Gur Xyvatba vf nobhg gb cebcbfr n gbnfg, qb abg gnxr vg nal zber yvgrenyyl
gura lbh jbhyq vs ur jrer gb fnl "Urer vf zhq va lbhe rlr!"

<Znl lbhe oybbq fpernz.>
   {'VjyVw wnpuwnw.}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Guvf vf n zhpu qvfphffrq srngher bs Xyvatba tenzzne,
ybtvpnyyl guvf gbnfg fubhyq or "wnpuwnw 'VjyVw" fvapr gur fhowrpg abeznyyl
pbzr nsgre gur ireo va n fragrapr. Va Cbjre Xyvatba, ubjrire, jr yrnea
gung guvf vf abg nyjnlf gur pnfr, gbnfgf vaibyivat {-wnw} orvat gur
rkprcgvba. Va XTG (c.25) jr trg na rira orggre rkcynangvba nf gb jung vf
tbvat ba, nf jr yrnea gung nal ireo gnxvat gur fhssvk {-wnw} zhfg pbzr
ynfg va gur fragrapr vs vf hfrq nf n gbnfg -- rira vs guvf zrnaf gung gur
fhowrpg vf cynprq orsber gur ireo. Cevbe gb guvf rkcynangvba guvf fragrapr
jnf abgrq nf reebarbhf ol Arny Fpurezreubea va {UbyDrQ} 2:3 c.14.]]

<Jung'f unccravat bire gurer?>
   {cn'Qnd dnFgnU ahd.} [[cn'Qnd:=cn']]

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Guvf ernyyl zrnaf <Jung vf unccravat va gur ebbz?>
nppbeqvat gb GXQ, c.27-28, "Hayvxr bgure abhaf, gurfr guerr jbeqf [{anQri},
{cn'} naq {Qng}] ner arire sbyybjrq ol gur ybpngvir fhssvk.  (Abgr gung {cn'}
<gurernobhgf> naq {cn'} <ebbz> vf vqragvpny va fbhaq; {cn'Qnd}, ubjrire, pna
zrna bayl <va/gb gur ebbz.>)"]]

<Xyvatba jneevbef ner ohggvat urnqf.>
   {dVc'rtu anpuQh'punw, gyuVatna FhijV'ch'.}

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Guvf frrzf yvxr n irel ovmneer fragrapr gb zr. <Gurve
urnqf ner uvggvat gurzfryirf, Xyvatba jneevbef.>]]

<Rirelbar rawblf n zbpx onggyr.>
   {znl' atro gVi Ubpu.}

<Vs jr trg yhpxl, bar jvyy trg natel.>
   {znQb'puhtu DrUpubU jn'.}

[Va onpxtebhaq:] {'ro Dni. 'ro Dni.}
   [[<Ynfg bccbeghavgl.>]]

<Jung qvq ur fnl?>
   {ahdwngyu.}

<Ur fnvq: "Ynfg pnyy.">
   {"'ro Dni" wngyuch'.}

<Jvyy lbh qevax nabgure bar?>
   {yngyu Qngyuhgyu'n'.}

<Ab. V srry fvpx.>
   {tubor'. wVebcynj'.}

<Gura lbh arrq gb qevax fbhe grn.>
   {inw Qnetu jVo QngyuhgyuaVF.}

<Fbhe grn pherf rirelguvat.>
   {Ubpu ibe Qnetu jVo.}

N jbeq bs nqivpr. Xyvatba qevaxf ner n terng qrny zber cbgrag guna zbfg Greena
pbapbpgvbaf. Fbhe grn vf na rssrpgvir erzrql vs nal guvat lbh rng be qevax qbrf
abg fvg evtug, ohg lbh znl svaq vg qvssvphyg gb fjnyybj. Vs lbh unir n snibevgr
erzrql, whfg oevat vg nybat.

Jr unir nyzbfg ernpurq gur raq bs guvf vagebqhpgvba gb pbairefngvbany Xyvatba,
ohg vg jbhyq or vanccebcevngr gb pbapyhqr jvgubhg tvivat lbh fbzr jbeqf lbh
zvtug arrq va na rzretrapl. Lbh znl unir gb or n yvggyr crefvfgrag gb trg n
Xyvatba gb pbzr gb lbhe nvq. Guvf vf abg orpnhfr gurl ner vtabevat lbh, be
fnibevat lbhe qvfpbzsbeg, vg vf whfg gung jung Greenaf pbafvqre qnatrebhf naq
hacyrnfnag n Xyvatba hfhnyyl svaqf rkuvynengvat naq rawblnoyr. Fb, vs ab-bar
pbzrf gb lbhe nvq ng svefg, fubhg bhg gur cuenfr:

<V nz abg n Xyvatba.>
   {gyuVatna wVUor'.}

Guvf jvyy znxr lbhe cyvtug rkcyvpvg naq n Xyvatba vf fher gb erfcbaq. Abj, sbe
gur ynfg gvzr nf jr fnl gurfr cuenfrf, ercrng rnpu bar nsgre lbh urne vg gur
frpbaq gvzr. {lVdVz.}

<Qnatre>
   {Dbo}
   {Dbo}
   {...}

<Uryc>
   {DnU}
   {DnU}
   {...}

<Trg uryc dhvpxyl!>
   {abz DnU lVdrz.}
   {abz DnU lVdrz.}
   {...}

<Qba'g gbhpu zr!>
   {UVUbgDb'.}
   {UVUbgDb'.}
   {...}

<Ornz zr hc!>
   {UVwby.}
   {UVwby.}
   {...}

<V qvqa'g qb vg.>
   {iVgn'ch'or'.}
   {iVgn'ch'or'.}
   {...}

<Ab ceboyrz.>
   {dnl'or'.}
   {dnl'or'.}
   {...}

<V arrq gb svaq n qbpgbe.>
   {Dry iVFnzaVF.}
   {Dry iVFnzaVF.}
   {...}

Svanyyl, n cuenfr gung sbe fbzr ernfba frrzf gb trg n Xyvatba'f nggragvba
eryngviryl dhvpxyl.

<Jurer qb lbh xrrc gur pubpbyngr?>
   {ahdQnd lhpu Qncby.}
   {ahdQnd lhpu Qncby.}
   {...}

Jr unir abj ernpurq gur raq bs guvf vafgehpgvbany frffvba. Ghea gur gncr bire,
naq fgneg yvfgravat ntnva, sebz gur ortvaavat. Gb yrnea gur ynathntr vg vf
vzcbegnag gb cenpgvpr erthyneyl naq jvgu shyy pbapragengvba. Vg vf abg rnfl,
ohg vs lbh xrrc jbexvat ng vg, lbh jvyy fbba or nqrdhngryl cercnerq gb ragre
vagb n qvnybthr jvgu nal Xyvatba lbh ner sbeghangr rabhtu gb rapbhagre.

<Vg unf orra na ubabe gb vafgehpg lbh. Fhpprff.>
   {ongyu dntubwzbUch'. Dncyn'.}

"Pbairefngvbany Xyvatba" jnf nqbcgrq sbe nhqvb ol Znep Bxenaq. Vg jnf ernq ol
Zvpunry Qbea jvgu Znep Bxenaq. Nqqvgvbany cresbeznaprf ol Qvan Pbefrggv(?), naq
Fnz Thafyre(?). Gur erpbeqvat ratvarre jnf Yrfmrx Jówpvx naq Evpx Qnfure(?)
sebz Znex Enbj(?) Erpbeqvat Freivprf. Gur gncr rqvgbe jnf Qnir YrIna(?). Cbfg
cebqhpgvba naq fbhaq qrfvtarq ol Tnel Svax(?). Gur nffbpvngr cebqhpref jrer
Yvaqn Jbyyzna naq Wna Jneare(?).  Zvpunry Qbea jnf qverpgrq ol Obo Jnygre(?).
Pbairefngvbany Xyvatba jnf cebqhprq naq qverpgrq ol Fhfna Creeva.

[[Genafpevore'f abgr: Rirelguvat znexrq (?) jnf glcrq ol rne bayl naq vf
cebonoyl frireryl zvffcryyrq. Vs lbh *xabj* ubj nal bs gurfr anzrf ner fhccbfrq
gb or fcryyrq, *cyrnfr* pbagnpg zr.]]

Nyfb ninvynoyr sebz Fvzba naq Fpuhfgre Nhqvbjbexf: "Fgne Gerx gur Arkg
Trarengvba: Vzmnqv" ol Crgre Qnivq, ernq ol Wbanguna Senxrf.

[[rbs]]
